Component customisation documentation (#335)
Financial-Times/origami-website: _components/customisation.md

This document aims to help you decide if you should customise a component for your project, show the ways a component may be customised, and demonstrate why other approaches should be avoided.

<abbr title="Too long; didn't read">
<strong>
TL;DR:
</strong>
</abbr>
- Double check customisation is appropriate. Reusing an existing pattern or updating a component to support and share your usecase is preferable.
- Specify a brand which suits your type of project.
- Customise component's using their Sass API.
- Avoid CSS overrides, they are unsupported and unreliable.

## Check Customisation Is Appropriate

The first step before customising an Origami component is to ask:
1. Is there an existing style which could work already? After searching the [Origami Registry](https://registry.origami.ft.com/components) it's worth double checking in the <a href="https://financialtimes.slack.com/messages/{{site.data.contact.slack}}">#{{site.data.contact.slack}}</a> Slack channel, to reduce duplicated effort and to help maintain a consistent user interface across FT Group projects.

> 2. Would your customisation be useful for other teams/projects? Maybe a component should be updated or added to for your usecase, so other teams benefit from your work. A new component might be more appropriate if your design diverges significantly.

Reviewer: When I read this, I couldn't see what the difference was meant to be between "updated" and "added to" in the part "Maybe a component should be updated or added to for your usecase"

Author: Dropping "added to" works: "Maybe a component should be updated for your usecase". 👍  I was thinking along the lines of updating an existing component vs. something like adding a new variant, but it doesn't matter to the point here and is filler

A good place to start is to ask for feedback in the <a href="https://financialtimes.slack.com/messages/{{site.data.contact.slack}}">#{{site.data.contact.slack}}</a> Slack channel. The core Origami team, along with the design team, can help identify similar existing styles or help make any relevant component updates to support your usecase without customisation.

## Brands

> Most Origami components are branded to provide a distinct appearance within different contexts. A brand may be thought of as a kind of theme, but applies to all components within a project.

Reviewer: We should likely remove the part which says a brand can be thought of as a kind of theme, because we use the concept of a theme later on in the tutorial when we talk about "Themes/Variants". I would worry using "theme" here would confuse readers

### Supported brands

Origami maintained brands include:
- master: FT branding for public ft.com sites and affiliates.

> - internal: Style suitable for internal products, tools, and documentation.

Reviewer: I read the "internal" as applying to all three items in the list. Which would make me think public documentation sites shouldn't use the internal brand.

I'd be tempted to re-order this list so that "internal products" is last in the list to avoid the chance of people reading it the way I have.

```suggestion
- internal: Style suitable for tools, documentation, and internal products.
```

Author: >I read the "internal" as applying to all three items in the list. Which would make me think public documentation sites shouldn't use the internal brand.
That's how it was intended, as in internal for internal use not private. Happy to switch to your suggestion if that make it sounds more like the internal style can be viewed publicly

- whitelabel: Base, structural styles only to build on and customise.

Taking `o-table` as an example, the "master" brand version offers a "row stripes" feature, which uses "master" brand colours such as "paper" and "wheat":
{% include demo.html component="o-table" demo="row-stripes" brand="master" height="242px" %}

The "internal" brand version also supports "row stripes" but uses a different colour palette:
{% include demo.html component="o-table" demo="row-stripes" brand="internal" height="242px" %}

The "whitelabel" brand does not support "row stripes" and therefore outputs no styles to support that feature:

> {% include demo.html component="o-table" demo="basic" brand="whitelabel" height="256px" %}

Reviewer: This demo currently gets clipped on the right.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1569131/111618893-d15cb200-87dc-11eb-8046-04705afe6ab6.png)

Author: The demo does in the registry too. I can live with that. We don't have a responsive demo with stripes, which I think is helpful to show brands.

### Choose A Brand

The "master" brand is the default brand, but your project may use any of the provided Origami brands. The brand is configured once and affects all components used by your project.

To select a brand within your project, see the tutorial for your method of including Origami components:

- [Build service tutorial](/docs/tutorials/build-service/#selecting-a-brand)
- [Manual build tutorial](/docs/tutorials/manual-build/#selecting-a-brand)

### Customise A Brand

> If your project has access to a component's Sass API (see the [manual build tutorial](/docs/tutorials/manual-build/#selecting-a-brand)) it is possible to customise your chosen brand. For example, at the time of writing, the [`oTypographySetFont`](https://registry.origami.ft.com/components/o-typography@6.4.5/sassdoc?brand=master#mixin-otypographysetfont) mixin can be used to customise component fonts. This customises the font used by all components including in your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your project has access to a component's Sass API (see the [manual build tutorial](/docs/tutorials/manual-build/#selecting-a-brand)) it is possible to customise your chosen brand. For example, at the time of writing, the [`oTypographySetFont`](https://registry.origami.ft.com/components/o-typography@6.4.5/sassdoc?brand=master#mixin-otypographysetfont) mixin can be used to customise component fonts. This customises the font used by all components included in your project.
```

<aside>

> Not all components support brand customisation but the Origami team are happy to add support as needed. Ask the core Origami team for new features in the <a href="https://financialtimes.slack.com/messages/{{site.data.contact.slack}}">#{{site.data.contact.slack}}</a> Slack channel.

Reviewer: I reworded this aside in a way where (to me at least) it reads more like anyone can add brand customisation support to a component

```suggestion
Not all components support brand customisation but the Origami team are happy for support to be added as needed. Ask the core Origami team about new features in the <a href="https://financialtimes.slack.com/messages/{{site.data.contact.slack}}">#{{site.data.contact.slack}}</a> Slack channel.
```

</aside>

<pre><code class="o-syntax-highlight--scss">// Incomplete example for demo purposes only

// Set the brand.
$o-brand: 'whitelabel';

// Customise: Tell the o-typography component to use our custom

> // font, it will affect all other components which
> // as they are built using o-typography.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// font, it will affect all other components which
// are built using o-typography.
```

@include oTypographySetFont(
    $type: 'sans',
    $family: 'Comic Sans MS', sans-serif
);

// Customise: Tell the o-header-services we want hot pink
// in the navigation.
@include oHeaderServicesCustomize((
	'nav-hover-background': hotpink
));
</code></pre>

<figure>
	<img alt="" src="/assets/images/component-customisation/whitelabel-customisation.png" />
	<figcaption>

>         An example project which builds on the whitelabel brand. The font has been customised with `o-typography` Sass (oooh! Comic Sans). It affects all components which use `o-typography`, including the other components on the page, `o-table` and `o-header-services`. `o-header-services` has also been customised using Sass to have a unique highlight colour (oooh! hotpink!)

Reviewer: Good caption 😄 

I checked how this renders in HTML and the backticks are present. Did you want the backticks converted to `<pre><code>` here?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1569131/111619948-0c131a00-87de-11eb-859b-759dbc77212e.png)

Author: So I noticed and didn't wrap in `code` out of laziness 🙈 But I actually think we should leave it like this. Visually it's not great and `code` isn't doing much semantically in this context around component names.
![Screenshot 2021-03-19 at 16 27 23](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10405691/111812505-19a8cc80-88d0-11eb-8422-81cbdd0bf7b5.png)

	</figcaption>
</figure>

This is great to create a distinct brand, where a customisation should affect all instances of a component across a project.

If your project is based on the master or internal brand, however, it is more likely that you want to create new variants of a component to use alongside existing ones. For example to output an additional banner style to support a new marketing campaign.

## Themes/Variants

If your project has access to a component's Sass (see the [manual build tutorial](/docs/tutorials/manual-build/#selecting-a-brand)) your project may use Sass mixins to customise components by outputting a new variant of that component. A component variant is an instance of a component with modified appearance or functionality.

> For instance, at the time of writing, the `o-banner` component has an [`oBannerAddTheme` mixin](https://registry.origami.ft.com/components/o-banner@3.4.2/sassdoc?brand=master#mixin-obanneraddtheme) which provides options for creating a banner theme with customised colour and background image:

Reviewer: I've now come to realise that we have o-brand use the term ["Variant"](https://registry.origami.ft.com/components/o-brand@4.0.0/readme#variant) and has defined what it means, but we have some component mixins use the term "theme" to mean the same thing.

We should plan some work to migrate to using only one of these terms.

Author: As discussed: 

A theme is a kind of variant, at least in my head. A table with alternating row stripe colours is a variant of the default table with no row stripes. A theme could be applied to the row stripe variant to change the stripe colours. I agree that it's confusing to use both terms and we should switch to using one. Although theme is a much more familiar term it doesn't work for all variants of a component, especially variants with unique functionality as well as appearance. I'll update these docs to use "variant" and delete mentions of "theme" outside the Sass mixins. In the future we might want to rename the mixins.

<pre><code class="o-syntax-highlight--scss">@include oBannerAddTheme('my-pikachu-theme', (
    background-image: url('https://example.org/pikachu.png'),
    background-color: oColorsByName('lemon'),
    text-color: oColorsByName('slate'),
    button-background-color: oColorsByName('crimson'),
));</code></pre>

> <aside>If your project is using the <a href="/docs/tutorials/build-service/">Origami Build Service</a>, and does not have access to the component's Sass API, it is not currently possible to create custom component variants. It may be possible in the future using <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Using_CSS_custom_properties">Custom CSS Properties (CSS Variables)</a>, when projects no longer support older browsers such as Internet Explorer.</aside>

Reviewer: I read this aside as saying it is possible to use the Origami Build Service and access the Sass API, which is currently not true. We only offer the ability to set the brand and system_code Sass variables via the service.

```suggestion
<aside>If your project is using the <a href="/docs/tutorials/build-service/">Origami Build Service</a>, you do not have access to the component's Sass API, as such it is not currently possible to create custom component variants. It may be possible in the future using <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Using_CSS_custom_properties">Custom CSS Properties (CSS Variables)</a>, when projects no longer support older browsers such as Internet Explorer.</aside>
```

<figure>
	<img alt="" src="/assets/images/component-customisation/pikachu-banner.png" />
	<figcaption>

>         A custom banner theme featuring a Pikachu background (this is a fun example but a bad one because Pikachu's ear obscures some text).

Reviewer: Should we be using the term "variant" here instead of "theme"?

Author: https://github.com/Financial-Times/origami-website/pull/335#discussion_r597799811

	</figcaption>
</figure>

## Avoid CSS Overrides

> Another way to customise components is by applying additional CSS styles within your project. This is not recommended and should be avoided. Applying styles on top of a components style is unreliable and should be avoided as component CSS may change in future minor releases in a way that conflicts with your overrides.

Reviewer: Maybe we should add emphasis on "This is not recommended and should be avoided."

We could also add an aside which repeats that this is not recommended, to really drive the point, since we really recommended not using this approach

Author: It couldn't hurt! I've emphasised "not recommended" and added an aside to offer support in removing overrides.

![Screenshot 2021-03-19 at 16 14 29](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10405691/111810802-4eb41f80-88ce-11eb-9641-d5710303c2bc.png)

Author: The aside now includes more English
![Screenshot 2021-03-19 at 16 16 04](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10405691/111810934-71463880-88ce-11eb-9c18-10601215c555.png)
